\section{Related Work}

\textbf{Verifiers, Reward Models, and LLM-as-Judge.}
Verifiers---functions that assign rewards to agent behavior---have driven progress across diverse AI domains, from game playing to mathematical reasoning and code generation.
Recently, large language models (LLMs) and multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) have been explored as general-purpose verifiers and evaluators.
Zheng et al. [1] studied the use of strong LLMs as judges for evaluating chat assistants, identifying position, verbosity, and self-enhancement biases in LLM judges.
Liu et al. [2] proposed G-Eval, a framework using LLMs with chain-of-thought prompting for NLG evaluation, while noting a potential bias toward LLM-generated text.
Shi et al. [3] further characterized position bias in LLM judges across pairwise and listwise settings, showing it varies significantly with solution quality gaps.
Beyond general-purpose evaluation, Lambert et al. [4] introduced RewardBench, a benchmark for evaluating reward models used in RLHF, covering chat, reasoning, and safety domains.
Zhang et al. [5] proposed Generative Verifiers (GenRM), training verifiers via next-token prediction to leverage the text generation capabilities of pretrained LLMs for solution verification.
Lù et al. [6] developed AgentRewardBench, the first benchmark assessing LLM judges specifically for web agent trajectory evaluation, finding that rule-based evaluation tends to underreport agent success rates.
These works highlight known biases in LLM-based evaluation, but are primarily studied in text-only settings or with discriminative verifiers.
This motivates the target paper's investigation of MLLMs as verifiers for multimodal, open-ended agent tasks, where existing biases such as position and verbosity preferences may co-occur with a distinct over-validation tendency---agreement bias---that has not been systematically characterized.

\textbf{Agent Benchmarks and Environments.}
The development of autonomous agents has been accompanied by the creation of increasingly realistic evaluation environments.
Zhou et al. [7] introduced WebArena, a realistic web environment with fully functional websites across e-commerce, social forums, and content management domains, establishing a foundation for reproducible web agent evaluation.
Building on this, Koh et al. [8] proposed VisualWebArena (VWA), extending WebArena with visually grounded tasks requiring agents to process image-text inputs.
For desktop environments, Xie et al. [9] introduced OSWorld, a scalable real-computer benchmark supporting task setup and execution-based evaluation across operating systems and desktop applications.
Le Sellier De Chezelles et al. [10] developed the BrowserGym ecosystem, unifying web agent benchmarks under a standardized gym-like interface for consistent evaluation.
For robotic manipulation, Mandlekar et al. [11] introduced robomimic, an open-source benchmark and dataset for learning from offline human demonstrations on multi-stage manipulation tasks of varying complexity.
Collectively, these benchmarks span web, desktop, and robotic domains, providing the diverse evaluation settings used in the target paper's study of MLLM verifiers across open-ended tasks.

\textbf{Agent Architectures and Self-Improvement.}
Several agent architectures and self-improvement methods form the foundation for the target paper's experiments.
Wei et al. [12] introduced chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting, demonstrating that intermediate reasoning steps significantly improve LLM performance on complex reasoning tasks.
Yao et al. [13] proposed ReAct, which interleaves reasoning traces with task-specific actions, enabling LLMs to induce and update action plans while interacting with external environments.
Shinn et al. [14] introduced Reflexion, a framework where language agents improve through verbal reflection on task feedback, maintaining reflective text in episodic memory for better decision-making in subsequent trials.
For robot learning, Chi et al. [15] proposed Diffusion Policy, representing visuomotor policies as conditional denoising diffusion processes, achieving strong performance across manipulation benchmarks including robomimic.
Yao et al. and Shinn et al. anchor the self-improvement and agent reasoning pipelines evaluated in the target paper, where MLLM verifiers provide the feedback signals that drive agent refinement.
However, the effectiveness of these pipelines depends critically on verifier quality: biased or overly permissive feedback can limit agents' ability to correct flawed behavior.
The target paper examines this dependency and proposes Self-Grounded Verification to improve verifier alignment for downstream self-improvement and online supervision.
